========================
 Exploring the Demo App
========================

The cliff source package includes a ``demoapp`` directory containing an example
main program with several command plugins.

Setup
=====

To install and experiment with the demo app you should create a virtual
environment and activate it. This will make it easy to remove the app later,
since it doesn't do anything useful and you aren't likely to want to hang onto
it after you understand how it works::

  $ pip install virtualenv
  $ virtualenv .venv
  $ . .venv/bin/activate
  (.venv)$

Next, install cliff in the same environment::

  (.venv)$ python setup.py install

Finally, install the demo application into the virtual environment::

  (.venv)$ cd demoapp
  (.venv)$ python setup.py install

Usage
=====

Both cliff and the demo installed, you can now run the command ``cliffdemo``.

For basic command usage instructions and a list of the commands available from
the plugins, run::

  (.venv)$ cliffdemo -h

or::

  (.venv)$ cliffdemo --help

Run the ``simple`` command by passing its name as argument to ``cliffdemo``::

  (.venv)$ cliffdemo simple

The ``simple`` command prints this output to the console::

  sending greeting
  hi!

To see help for an individual command, use the ``help`` command::

  (.venv)$ cliffdemo help files

or the ``--help`` option::

  (.venv)$ cliffdemo files --help

For more information, refer to the autogenerated documentation :ref:`below
<demoapp-sphinx>`.

The Source
==========

The ``cliffdemo`` application is defined in a ``cliffdemo`` package containing
several modules.

main.py
-------

The main application is defined in ``main.py``:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../demoapp/cliffdemo/main.py
   :linenos:

The :class:`DemoApp` class inherits from :class:`App` and overrides
:func:`__init__` to set the program description and version number. It also
passes a :class:`CommandManager` instance configured to look for plugins in the
``cliff.demo`` namespace.

The :func:`initialize_app` method of :class:`DemoApp` will be invoked after the
main program arguments are parsed, but before any command processing is
performed and before the application enters interactive mode. This hook is
intended for opening connections to remote web services, databases, etc. using
arguments passed to the main application.

The :func:`prepare_to_run_command` method of :class:`DemoApp` will be invoked
after a command is identified, but before the command is given its arguments
and run. This hook is intended for pre-command validation or setup that must be
repeated and cannot be handled by :func:`initialize_app`.

The :func:`clean_up` method of :class:`DemoApp` is invoked after a command
runs. If the command raised an exception, the exception object is passed to
:func:`clean_up`. Otherwise the ``err`` argument is ``None``.

The :func:`main` function defined in ``main.py`` is registered as a console
script entry point so that :class:`DemoApp` can be run from the command line
(see the discussion of ``setup.py`` below).

simple.py
---------

Two commands are defined in ``simple.py``:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../demoapp/cliffdemo/simple.py
   :linenos:

:class:`Simple` demonstrates using logging to emit messages on the console at
different verbose levels::

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo simple
    sending greeting
    hi!

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo -v simple
    prepare_to_run_command Simple
    sending greeting
    debugging
    hi!
    clean_up Simple

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo -q simple
    hi!

:class:`Error` always raises a :class:`RuntimeError` exception when it is
invoked, and can be used to experiment with the error handling features of
cliff::

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo error
    causing error
    ERROR: this is the expected exception

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo -v error
    prepare_to_run_command Error
    causing error
    ERROR: this is the expected exception
    clean_up Error
    got an error: this is the expected exception

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo --debug error
    causing error
    this is the expected exception
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File ".../cliff/app.py", line 218, in run_subcommand
        result = cmd.run(parsed_args)
      File ".../cliff/command.py", line 43, in run
        self.take_action(parsed_args)
      File ".../demoapp/cliffdemo/simple.py", line 24, in take_action
        raise RuntimeError('this is the expected exception')
    RuntimeError: this is the expected exception
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "/Users/dhellmann/Envs/cliff/bin/cliffdemo", line 9, in <module>
        load_entry_point('cliffdemo==0.1', 'console_scripts', 'cliffdemo')()
      File ".../demoapp/cliffdemo/main.py", line 33, in main
        return myapp.run(argv)
      File ".../cliff/app.py", line 160, in run
        result = self.run_subcommand(remainder)
      File ".../cliff/app.py", line 218, in run_subcommand
        result = cmd.run(parsed_args)
      File ".../cliff/command.py", line 43, in run
        self.take_action(parsed_args)
      File ".../demoapp/cliffdemo/simple.py", line 24, in take_action
        raise RuntimeError('this is the expected exception')
    RuntimeError: this is the expected exception

.. _demoapp-list:

list.py
-------

``list.py`` includes a single command derived from :class:`cliff.lister.Lister`
which prints a list of the files in the current directory.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../demoapp/cliffdemo/list.py
   :linenos:

:class:`Files` prepares the data, and :class:`Lister` manages the output
formatter and printing the data to the console::

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo files
    +---------------+------+
    |      Name     | Size |
    +---------------+------+
    | build         |  136 |
    | cliffdemo.log | 2546 |
    | Makefile      | 5569 |
    | source        |  408 |
    +---------------+------+

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo files -f csv
    "Name","Size"
    "build",136
    "cliffdemo.log",2690
    "Makefile",5569
    "source",408

.. _demoapp-show:

show.py
-------

``show.py`` includes a single command derived from :class:`cliff.show.ShowOne`
which prints the properties of the named file.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../demoapp/cliffdemo/show.py
   :linenos:

:class:`File` prepares the data, and :class:`ShowOne` manages the output
formatter and printing the data to the console::

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo file setup.py
    +---------------+--------------+
    |     Field     |    Value     |
    +---------------+--------------+
    | Name          | setup.py     |
    | Size          | 5825         |
    | UID           | 502          |
    | GID           | 20           |
    | Modified Time | 1335569964.0 |
    +---------------+--------------+

setup.py
--------

The demo application is packaged using setuptools.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../demoapp/setup.py
   :linenos:

The important parts of the packaging instructions are the ``entry_points``
settings. All of the commands are registered in the ``cliff.demo`` namespace.
Each main program should define its own command namespace so that it only loads
the command plugins that it should be managing.

Command Extension Hooks
=======================

Individual subcommands of an application can be extended via hooks registered
as separate plugins. In the demo application, the ``hooked`` command has a
single extension registered.

The namespace for hooks is a combination of the application namespace and the
command name. In this case, the application namespace is ``cliff.demo`` and the
command is ``hooked``, so the extension namespace is ``cliff.demo.hooked``. If
the subcommand name includes spaces, they are replaced with underscores
("``_``") to build the namespace.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../demoapp/cliffdemo/hook.py
   :linenos:

Although the ``hooked`` command does not add any arguments to the parser it
creates, the help output shows that the extension adds a single
``--added-by-hook`` option.

::

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo hooked -h
    sample hook get_parser()
    usage: cliffdemo hooked [-h] [--added-by-hook ADDED_BY_HOOK]

    A command to demonstrate how the hooks work

    optional arguments:
      -h, --help            show this help message and exit
      --added-by-hook ADDED_BY_HOOK

    extension epilog text

    (.venv)$ cliffdemo hooked
    sample hook get_parser()
    before
    this command has an extension
    after

.. seealso::

   :class:`cliff.hooks.CommandHook` -- The API for command hooks.

.. _demoapp-sphinx:

Autogenerated Documentation
===========================

The following documentation is generated using the following directive, which
is provided by :doc:`the cliff Sphinx extension <sphinxext>`.

.. code-block:: rest

   .. autoprogram-cliff:: cliffdemo.main.DemoApp
      :application: cliffdemo

   .. autoprogram-cliff:: cliff.demo
      :application: cliffdemo

Output
------

Global Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoprogram-cliff:: cliffdemo.main.DemoApp
   :application: cliffdemo

Command Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. autoprogram-cliff:: cliff.demo
   :application: cliffdemo
